Title: USC President Carol L. Folt recaps a year of Trojan accomplishments
Link: https://youtu.be/4T7zVV3nzFY
Body: 
Description: As the 2021-2022 academic year wraps up, the president shares a video message. Watch her roundup of the year’s highlights and hear her words of thanks to students, faculty and staff.

Title: An architect of the landmark Human Genome Project looks back
Link: https://news.usc.edu/199827/human-genome-project-computational-biology-michael-waterman/
Body: 
			In the early 1980s, a quiet revolution sparked to life in Los Angeles.
Michael Waterman, then a recently hired professor of mathematics at the USC Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, had published a new algorithm with colleague Temple Smith that determined similar regions of protein or DNA sequences. The Smith-Waterman algorithm would serve as a foundational piece of an emerging field of study, computational biology and bioinformatics.
Forty years later, Waterman is considered a father of quantitative and computational biology and his work forms the basis of numerous seminal studies, including the landmark Human Genome Project. The results of his work enabled researchers to analyze and identify long strings of genetic code, profoundly impacting molecular biology and medicine, cancer treatment and biofuel development and changing the way we view life on Earth. He will be recognized for his contributions to the field at the USC Computational Biology Symposium 2022 beginning Thursday.
But when he first proposed applying mathematical models to biological systems, peers didn’t know what to make of his work.
We submitted my first paper in this area to a journal and it was roundly rejected.
Michael Waterman, University Professor Emeritus

“We submitted my first paper in this area to a journal and it was roundly rejected, infuriating my co-author. Part of the rejection was that they felt the paper satisfied neither the biologists nor the mathematicians,” said Waterman, a University Professor Emeritus at USC. “Papers that attempt to address the spaces between subjects are usually worthless — except when they aren’t.
“I was convinced this was really going to be an area with important insights. I had no idea where we were going. But what started to get people interested was the Human Genome Project.”
Human Genome Project propels Waterman to international acclaim
The launch of the Human Genome Project — the international research effort to determine the DNA sequence of the entire human genome — in the early 1990s exploded our understanding of biology and foreshadowed the increasing importance of computing in the natural sciences. Waterman developed two algorithms essential to the project’s success. The Lander-Waterman algorithm accelerated physical mapping of genetic sequences, while the earlier Smith-Waterman algorithm serves as the foundation of computation genetics and remains the standard for gene and protein analysis.
The popularity and importance of the project thrust Waterman into the spotlight and earned him numerous accolades, including a Guggenheim Fellowship, the Canada Gairdner International Award and elections as a foreign member of the French Académie des Sciences and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
“I was a scientist who didn’t publicize himself and didn’t give too many talks on my research, but the Human Genome Project transformed me,” he said. “I started giving talks to mathematicians about biology and talks to biologists about what math could do for them. All because there weren’t that many people doing this research. Of course, today it’s thousands, if not tens of thousands of people.”
When Waterman joined USC in 1982, he found a nascent genetics program and an administration open to developing an interdisciplinary research approach. His computational molecular biology group within the Department of Mathematics resulted in the creation of the world’s first PhD program in computational biology and bioinformatics. Nearly 40 years later, in 2021, USC Dornsife College announced the creation of the Department of Quantitative and Computation Biology. It hosts some of the top researchers in the field, including Remo Rohs, Geoffrey Fudenberg, Mark Chaisson and others, and their success puts the future of the field in good stead, Waterman said.
Professor Waterman’s legacy at USC are many firsts.
Remo Rohs, USC Dornsife professor
of quantitative and computational biology

“Professor Waterman’s legacy at USC are many firsts — the first PhD program in computational biology and bioinformatics in the world and one of the first undergraduate majors in quantitative biology [QBIO] in the country,” said Rohs, professor of quantitative and computational biology and founding chair of the Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology. “I enjoy seeing that the QBIO undergraduate students still have a special place in professor WatermanÆs heart — I think they will be his proudest university achievement.”
“Now we have an academic unit so whatever the future of the field, it’s in their hands rather than being diffused,” Waterman added. “I like the group of young faculty that are in the department now — they are the future, and they have written some really excellent articles and books. It excites me to see them doing so well.”
Computational biology expert still looking for ‘the spaces between subjects’
This year marks two major milestones for Waterman. He rings in his 80th birthday and will be honored at the USC Computational Biology Symposium. Celebrating the 40th anniversary of quantitative biology and bioinformatics at USC, the symposium will feature Waterman and other luminaries in the field.
Waterman remains abreast of the latest developments in computational biology, regularly sitting in on departmental meetings and offering insights. He is especially interested in the analysis of molecular dynamics within cells, which — fittingly — marries biology and physics to allow scientists to more fully understand how cells operate.
“Biology is one of those subjects where the more you learn, the more complicated it gets. I’m not somebody who just drills down into pure math,” he said. “Pure math interests me less now than interacting with the world and its reflections.”
More stories about: Computational Biology, Faculty			
Description: USC University Professor Emeritus Michael Waterman stood at the forefront of computational biology 40 years ago. The world is still catching up.

Title: War in Ukraine hits home for Trojan rower
Link: https://news.usc.edu/199832/war-in-ukraine-hits-home-for-trojan-rower/
Body: 
			The demands of being a Division I athlete at a top university like USC are more than most can handle. For the last few months, rower Anastasiia Slivina has been meeting all of those challenges — studying, attending class, practicing, training, competing — on autopilot. With her home country of Ukraine under attack, nothing else seems quite as important.
“People ask how I’m coping with this, and honestly don’t even know,” Slivina said. “And the worst thing is that I would much rather just be there and help my country somehow.”
Rower Anastasiia Slivina came to USC in 2019. Although her first season with the Trojans was cut short due to the COVID-19 pandemic, she was able to return home and compete for Ukraine at the 2020 and 2021 European Championships. (Photo/Courtesy of USC Athletics)
On Feb. 24, Russia launched its unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. In the days leading up to the attack, Slivina said she was already on edge. Normally, she’d have a class from 6 to 8 p.m.; on that day, she decided to stay home instead — and then the text messages started rolling in.
“Thank God I was home,” she said. “When I first heard that news, I cried for a long time.”
A family at war in Ukraine
Slivina, who grew up in Kyiv, said her family could not flee the country because her 19-year-old younger brother was required to stay and fight. While the rest of the family stayed at their home in the countryside, her mother, who is a doctor, had to return to work in Kyiv to support them. Slivina said the hospital has become her mother’s wartime home. Her work never stops, and when her mother can sleep, Slivina says she does so in corridors away from windows.
Meanwhile, Slivina is nearly 6,300 miles away, competing for USC and working toward her bachelor’s degree in international relations and social sciences from the USC Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences.
“That first week was probably the hardest for me because it was very hard for me to socialize and I got overwhelmed really quickly,” Slivina said. “But I kept practicing. … I always tried to keep it cool with my teammates just because I didn’t want to spread my negative energy to them.”
According to her teammates, Slivina brings only positive energy to practice and meets.
“I cannot imagine how I would react in the situation that Stassie is in right now, but her strength and positivity inspire me,” said fellow rower Evita Franckevica. “It doesn’t matter what is happening in her life, Stassie will do her best to make sure that every person around her is happy and is in good spirits. She always strives to be the best person, student, athlete and friend while facing any challenges that come her way head-on.”
Pulling for each other
Slivina came to USC in 2019 after having rowed competitively for a little over two years. Born in St. Petersburg, Russia, and raised in Kyiv, Slivina trained in taekwondo until she was 15. After leaving that sport, she was looking for a new way to compete and took up rowing at the suggestion of her physical education teacher. She quickly excelled and was asked to compete for the more professional clubs in Kyiv, which eventually caught the eye of USC coaches. Her first season with the Trojans was cut short due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but Slivina was able to return home and compete for her country at the 2020 and 2021 European Championships.
But as she talks about the happy memories of Ukraine, her mood darkens as her thoughts turn to the war. She says when she watches the media coverage from Ukraine, her heart aches. At the same time, she watches the media coverage from Russia, and she’s appalled at the lies and propaganda she sees. The media coverage here in the United States only makes her feel even more alone.
I feel like people just don’t understand the scope — it should matter to everybody.
Anastasiia Slivina, USC rower from Ukraine

“It’s not just Ukraine has been attacked, but it’s also a war against democracy, and against humanity,” Slivina said. “I feel like people just don’t understand the scope — it should matter to everybody.”
The 15th-ranked Trojan women’s rowing team approach their final stretch of the season, with only the NCAA Championships left to go. Slivina knows this is one of the best rowing seasons she’s had while at USC, but it comes during one of the worst years of her life.
“Stassie is pure grit — some people are gritty, but she truly defines it,” said USC rowing head coach Josh Adam.
Despite carrying a pain that most couldn’t imagine, Slivina is still on those boats with her teammates. She’s still at the workouts, and she’s still in the classroom. Though she doesn’t have an answer for how she’s been able to persevere, she continues to move forward.
“I obviously have some breakdown moments, but I understand myself, and know that’s OK in this situation,” Slivina said. “Ukraine means a lot to me, and I have a very strong spiritual connection to home, my family and the nation.”
More stories about: Rowing, Students, Ukraine			
Description: Despite the conflict in her home country, junior Anastasiia Slivina stays strong for her family and her teammates.
Process 13038 has exited with status 0
Detaching
dlv dap (12895) exited with code: 0

